Simplifies NIP-65 (#700)
nostr-protocol/nips: 65.md

Relay List Metadata
-------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:mikedilger` `author:vitorpamplona`

> Defines a replaceable event using `kind:10002` to advertise preferred relays for discovering a user's content and receiving fresh content from others.

Reviewer: Those two reasons sound the same to me.  How about "for finding a user's content and for ensuring content that references them can be found by them."

Author: Not only by them, right? By anybody. 

The idea I was trying to convey in the latter part, is that this NIP tells other users where to broadcast events that involve the author, which is a novelty of this NIP. We don't have that logic anywhere else in Nostr. It's not about them finding it. It's about how other users should behave if they implement this NIP. The finding is a consequence of that behavior.

The event MUST include a list of `r` tags with relay URIs and a `read` or `write` marker. If the marker is omitted, the relay is used for both purposes.

The `.content` is not used.

```json
{
  "kind": 10002,
  "tags": [
    ["r", "wss://alicerelay.example.com"],
    ["r", "wss://brando-relay.com"],
    ["r", "wss://expensive-relay.example2.com", "write"],
    ["r", "wss://nostr-relay.example.com", "read"],
  ],
  "content": "",
  ...other fields
```

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists in `kind:3`. Instead, `Kind:3` relays SHOULD serve as a fallback option for users that don't have a `kind:10002` event. 

Reviewer: I don't think it's appropriate to reference kind:3 relay lists as if they are a thing. There is no NIP for them. I would reference it, but amongst a more general "other relay lists".  Otherwise you are putting out a SHOULD that cannot be properly coded against since nobody knows what kind:3 relay lists are (no NIP for them).

So maybe this:  "This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as kind:3 style relay lists).  Clients MAY substitute other relay lists in situations where a kind:10002 relay list cannot be found."

Author: Changed

## When to Use Read and Write

When seeking events **from** a user, Clients SHOULD use the WRITE relays of the user's `kind:10002`

When seeking events **about** a user, where the user was tagged, Clients SHOULD use the READ relays of the user's `kind:10002` 

When broadcasting an event, Clients SHOULD:

- Broadcast the event to the WRITE relays of the author
- Broadcast the event all READ relays of each tagged user. 

## Motivation

The old model of using a fixed relay list per user centralizes in large relay operators: 

  - Most users submit their posts to the same highly popular relays, aiming to achieve greater visibility among a broader audience.
  - Many users are pulling events from a large number of relays in order to get more data at the expense of duplication
  - Events are being copied between relays, oftentimes to many different relays
  
This NIP allows Clients to connect directly with the most up-to-date relay set from each individual user, eliminating the need of broadcasting events to popular relays. 

## Final Considerations

> 1. Clients should guide users to keep `kind:10002` lists small (2-4 relays). 

Reviewer: Not so sure about 2-4.  I think the low number should be 2, to imply redundancy.  Ideally the high number would be 4 as you say, but in the current environment it's safer to post to more relays so that clients that don't support NIP-65 are more likely to hear you.  I use 8 at the moment.

> 2. Clients should spread an author's `kind:10002` events to as many relays as viable, all of them if possible. 

Reviewer: Not sure about "all of them."  I use 54 relays that seem to actually operate properly, among 475 entries in my list (some of which are bugs)

Author: Removed

> 3. `kind:10002` events should only be used to advertise relays. The user's configuration when using Clients should stay in Kind 3.

Reviewer: Again the kind 3 reference.

Author: Fixed

> 4. DMs should be broadcasted to the author's WRITE relays and to the receiver's READ relays to keep maximum privacy. 

Reviewer: This is fine for now.  I think I'll do a separate PR that adds a "dm" marker which is like "write" but is specific to DMs.  This PR can just be about clarification.

Reviewer: Hang on I didn't read it right.  Why should DMs go to the authors WRITE relays?  So the author can read them back? Maybe.  In either case, this doesn't do anything that improves privacy, it is puttng the DMs everywhere you might put anything. So I wouldn't say "to keep maximum privacy."

Author: Is there any way we can generalize this to private events (like a private zap) and not only DMs?

Relay List Metadata
-------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:mikedilger` `author:vitorpamplona`

Defines a replaceable event using `kind:10002` to advertise preferred relays for discovering a user's content and receiving fresh content from others.

The event MUST include a list of `r` tags with relay URIs and a `read` or `write` marker. If the marker is omitted, the relay is used for both purposes.

The `.content` is not used.

```json
{
  "kind": 10002,
  "tags": [
    ["r", "wss://alicerelay.example.com"],
    ["r", "wss://brando-relay.com"],
    ["r", "wss://expensive-relay.example2.com", "write"],
    ["r", "wss://nostr-relay.example.com", "read"],
  ],
  "content": "",
  ...other fields
```

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Reviewer 2: Yes, but why mention kind 3? Just say "clients can try their best if the data isn't available".

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Author: I like being specific. People know kind3 even if it is not specified as a NIP. Abstracting it just raises more questions (e.g. is there another Kind3-like type I don't know about?). We just need to help them wrap their minds around this NIP65 idea and how it integrates with their existing way of doing business.

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Author: But I can remove kind 3 if people want.

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Reviewer 2: Votes? one for, one against so far @mikedilger be our tie breaker

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Reviewer: I like the consistency of not mentioning something not NIPped else some people will be confused. But I also like the specificity of mentioning it so people understand the main de-facto alternative we are thinking about.  So I'm not going to be a good tie-breaker here.

> This NIP doesn't fully replace relay lists that are designed to configure a client's usage of relays (such as `kind:3` style relay lists). Clients MAY use other relay lists in situations where a `kind:10002` relay list cannot be found.

Reviewer 2: lol ok @fiatjaf tell us what to do

When seeking events **from** a user, Clients SHOULD use the WRITE relays of the user's `kind:10002`

When seeking events **about** a user, where the user was tagged, Clients SHOULD use the READ relays of the user's `kind:10002` 

When broadcasting an event, Clients SHOULD:

- Broadcast the event to the WRITE relays of the author
- Broadcast the event all READ relays of each tagged user. 

## Motivation

The old model of using a fixed relay list per user centralizes in large relay operators: 

  - Most users submit their posts to the same highly popular relays, aiming to achieve greater visibility among a broader audience.
  - Many users are pulling events from a large number of relays in order to get more data at the expense of duplication
  - Events are being copied between relays, oftentimes to many different relays
  
This NIP allows Clients to connect directly with the most up-to-date relay set from each individual user, eliminating the need of broadcasting events to popular relays. 

## Final Considerations

1. Clients SHOULD guide users to keep `kind:10002` lists small (2-4 relays). 

2. Clients SHOULD spread an author's `kind:10002` events to as many relays as viable. 

> 3. `kind:10002` events MUST only be used to advertise the user's preferred relays to others. The Client's configuration SHOULD stay in other lists where other factors can be considered, such as specific relays for a given UI feature of the Client.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, I take a different approach, but yours is valid. Where do you store these settings? Just in the app?

> 3. `kind:10002` events MUST only be used to advertise the user's preferred relays to others. The Client's configuration SHOULD stay in other lists where other factors can be considered, such as specific relays for a given UI feature of the Client.

Author: Yep, now we just store it locally. I didn't think it would be useful for anyone else

> 3. `kind:10002` events MUST only be used to advertise the user's preferred relays to others. The Client's configuration SHOULD stay in other lists where other factors can be considered, such as specific relays for a given UI feature of the Client.

Reviewer 2: Ok, then what about something like this:

```suggestion
3. `kind:10002` events should primarily be used to advertise the user's preferred relays to others. A user's own client may use other heuristics for selecting relays for fetching data.
```

> 4. DMs SHOULD only be broadcasted to the author's WRITE relays and to the receiver's READ relays to keep maximum privacy. 

Reviewer 3: I think we need some other special rule for DMs. I think ideally DMs would only go to a subset of the relays defined by the receiver, not the sender, so that would be just to _the receiver's READ relays_.

However, even that is not enough, because I may be perfectly willing to read public notes on some relays, but not DMs. For DMs specifically I may want to use one specific relay that I trust more with my metadata, for example.

Maybe add a different marker `"dm-read"` and fallback to the `"read"`?

Author: @mikedilger was adding DMs on the other PR. Should I add them here as well? 

Maybe DM is the wrong word. I can imagine a special relay that third parties can post to it but only the author can download from it.

Reviewer: This is a bit trickier because you have to read back your own DMs from somewhere to see the full conversation.

Author: Your own DMs from WRITE + replies from PROTECTED_READ_RELAYS

Author: Maybe protected DM relays are the subject of a new PR when we better understand them.

Reviewer: Agreed, let's punt on the special DM stuff for now, take one step at a time.

Reviewer 3: Agreed.

> 5. Relays that support this NIP MUST accept and serve kind 10002 events for everybody whether they are paying customers or not.

Reviewer 3: Is this line necessary? I think relay owners shouldn't be forced to accept a load of spam just because it has kind 10002 and they probably won't accept it, so better not have this line here as it may cause more confusion than help.

Author: I was fine with it because of the IF. IF the relay declares support for NIP-65, it MUST accept it. Relays can choose to not declare support.

Reviewer: This nip used to explain to relay operators why this isn't too big of a deal, but that disappeared from Vitor's rewrite:

- finding where someone posts is rather important
- these events do not have content that needs management
- relays only need to store one replaceable event per pubkey to offer this service

If someone tries to store a kind-10002 that has any content at all, relays are free to (and I suggest that they do) reject such events.

`draft` `optional` `author:mikedilger`

Defines a replaceable event using `kind:10002` to advertise a user's preferred relays to others. 

The event MUST include a list of `r` tags with relay URIs and a `read` or `write` marker. If the marker is omitted, it means the author uses the relay for both purposes.

The `content` is not used.

```json
{
  "kind": 10002,
  "tags": [
    ["r", "wss://alicerelay.example.com"],
    ["r", "wss://brando-relay.com"],
    ["r", "wss://expensive-relay.example2.com", "write"],
    ["r", "wss://nostr-relay.example.com", "read"],
  ],
  "content": "",
  ...other fields
```

> Clients must download all `kind:10002`s from their user's contact list and assemble a relay pool from there.

Reviewer: I would say something more like:

Clients SHOULD seek the `kind:10002` event for people their user's contact list in order to know where to find their events and where to copy them on events tagging them.

But I'm also ok with removing this paragraph entirely since it is implied.

## How to Use Read and Write

> When looking for a given event: 

Reviewer: When seeking the events of a given user:

> - Download the author's `kind:10002` and use the WRITE relays

Reviewer: Seek them on one or more of that user's WRITE relays

> - Download a tagged user's `kind:10002` and use the READ relays 

Reviewer: Scratch this.  You never read from somebody's read relays.  You only write there.

Author: Don't you read people's read relays when you are visiting their profile? Like to count the zaps they received?

Author: nice, that does make sense for the use in profile pages.

> When sending an event: 

Reviewer: When posting an event:

Post to all of your own user's WRITE relays.

- Download the author's `kind:10002` and Broadcast the new event to the WRITE relays

> - Download all tagged user's `kind:10002`s and Broadcast the new event all READ relays 

Reviewer: Nah, don't do this.  Put this:

When posting an event that tags a user:

Also post it to one or more of that user's READ relays.

Author: Isn't that the same thing?

### Motivation

The old model of using a fixed relay list per user centralizes in large relay operators: 

  - Most people are sending their posts to the same most popular relays in order to be more widely seen
  - Many people are pulling from a large number of relays (including many duplicate events) in order to get more data
  - Events are being copied between relays, oftentimes to many different relays
  
This NIP allows apps to connect directly with the most up-to-date relay set from each individual user, eliminating the need to use large operators. 

### Final Considerations

1. Clients should spread an author's kind `10002` events to as many relays as viable, all of them if possible. 

2. Kind `10002` should only be used to advertise relays. The user's configuration when using Clients should stay in Kind 3.

> 3. DMs should only be broadcasted to each author's WRITE relays to keep maximum privacy. 

Reviewer: This should be READ relays.  Send to other people at their READ relays, where *they* read from.   Confusing I know and sorry we are stuck with that.

Author: Fixed
